
Abstract Money gains value through use. As a limited quantity of money chases a set value of wealth, we see the price increase linearly with the velocity of the system. The more use, the higher the price. Likewise, as use cases are limited we can expect a decline in price. This effect can be coupled together with scarcity.
Bitcoin is a scarce economic good. Its value is retained from its use factor which as a settlement layer alone is severely limited.
When proposed changes such as segregated witness are introduced into the system, value is not added into the system, rather than value being added, it is distributed between aspects that are detrimental to the growth of the system. This occurs because schemes such as segregated witness allow for the introduction of fractional reserve systems into bitcoin. With these, the velocity of the system is lowered and bitcoin becomes a pure settlement system such as Swift. In this, value was transferred from bitcoin into sidechains.
 Keywords: 
Bitcoin, Scaling, Segregated Witness, economics 
Introduction The primary reason right now for introducing any change into the bitcoin network is scale. An inherent function of networks is to grow, to do this, it needs to maintain a transaction capability greater than the number of users. If bitcoin is to grow, this means the number of users on the system needs to grow significantly. This is our problem; the system has hit the maximum number of transactions and cannot accept any more users. This limit is not because of technical problems, it is because an arbitrary cap has been placed within the system. Right now, the equivalent way to look at this would be to think of the bitcoin protocol as an 8 Lane Hwy that has a single tollbooth managed by a half blind individual.
It is true that transactions get through, but the limits of the system are not even close to being tested. To scale adequately, bitcoin needs to be opened up to allow as many users as possible. As more users enter the system, the scarce nature of bitcoin will drive the price higher increasing the returns to the miners and hence making it more and more profitable even though more resources are needed. This is not about users of the system holding or storing Bitcoin, but rather using it for regular transactions as a true P2P system – as a true currency.
This is where the bait and switch, the magician’s trick that is noted as segregated witness comes in.
SegWit opens the opportunity to introduce sidechains. These are less secure than on block scaling, but as it is yet to be tested, there can be only hope that they will be good enough. The problem is that it is not secure and it is not enough. The first issue comes from scarcity, the second concerns the actual scalability of the system.
 Velocity of money Many people fail to understand causality. The value of money comes from supply and demand like everything else in an economic system. Many people have argued that the value of bitcoin stems from its ability to act as a store of value. This is converse to the actual answer. It is confusing the effect with the cause. As an example of this type of reasoning, it is possible to notice the increase in global temperatures since the 1950s. At the same time, there has been a significant rise in the amount of coffee that has been consumed. We could demonstrate a strong correlation between these two events however neither is causal.
In the instance of the value of bitcoin, is not that it can act as a store of value that causes its price to rise, it is use and demand that creates the store of value. There are a number of overly simplistic formulas that enable us to visualise the representation of money as a factor of its use. One of the most common ones is the velocity of money. As it reflects bitcoin, we can formulate the Keynesian system into a more useful metric. Here we will define the following values: 
the measure of money supply the velocity of the money supply the overall price level the value that represents the real GDP but which is designed as a measurement of 
wealth1 GDP is used as a proxy to measure the amount of wealth created by society in a year. It is not a terribly good measurement so when we are referring to Y in this argument we will refer to the amount of wealth 
 The definition of wealth differs with there being few (if any), definitions of wealth that are sufficiently wide to cover only those items of wealth that retain and express value. All wealth has value, but the converse is not true.
All value is not embodied or expressed in wealth.
 generated that we may or may not be able to measure. We are not seeking exact answers to society but a relative understanding of the currency effects.
These values are related using the following equation: P = MV / Y From this simple equation, we can see that there is a direct relationship between the velocity of money and its overall use within society. The price of money (P) as related to the money supply times the velocity divided by the amount of wealth created by society. Bitcoin itself creates new and novel uses of the underlying technology. This has a small but negligible impact on the overall wealth produced in a society each year. Compared to the overall currency, this remains to be a statistically insignificant amount and we will work on the assumption that this is for the foreseeable future how this distribution will remain.
We see in the graph below, the relationship between the monetary base and the base velocity of money.
 Figure 1: Top panel: level of monetary base, 1980:Q1 to 2010:Q3. Bottom panel: velocity of base.
In this figure presented in US dollars, we see how the introduction of new funds through quantitative easing failed to have the intended effect. More money was introduced, but as the monetary base was increased the amount of available money impacted the velocity. With no new wealth having been created the introduction of new money through quantitative easing simply led to an economic slowdown.
 When we are modelling the system in bitcoin, we can start with the overall assumption that the value Y representing the created wealth within society will not change significantly. That is, the differential Delta Y that represents the difference to the economy with an expanded use of bitcoin through nonmonetary means can be shown to be close to zero overall. This may vary in the future, but a reduction in the monetary supply further increases the value of money in any event for the amount left is smaller leaving the value greater as the amount of money in supply M is also decreased.
Taking this into account, we end up with a relationship between the variables P, M and V such that an increase in P implies an increase in MV.
P ⇒ MV There are two ways to look at the system, we can look at the total amount of money available through bitcoin, or we can look at the amount that can be used. The growth of the bitcoin monetary supply is occurring at 12.5 BTC per block or approximately 1800 bitcoin per day. At present, there are close to 16 ½ million bitcoin in circulation2. At the current generation rate, there will be approximately 657,000 new bitcoin generated in a 12 month period. This is around 4% inflation in the present system.
Consequently, we can model the system with regards to the change in monetary supply as a factor of that inflation. Hence, assuming GDP and the amount of wealth in society remains approximately equal3, we can see that the change in the value of bitcoin over the period ( P ) is related to the amount of bitcoin and the velocity. This can be expressed using the following equation: 
 Effectively, being that the supply of bitcoin is stable and suffered little variability through the mining process we see that the overall impact of the price comes from a factor of velocity and uptake. The number of people using bitcoin at present is extremely low. Under 1% of the population uses bitcoin at any point or has even had any use at present. This impacts the price as the supply and demand equation alters to satisfy this effect.
Given the same number of users, and the introduction of a constant demand, we see that the system is a linear equation with the price level related directly to the velocity of money. With all systems, supply and demand set price. What is being overlooked is that for any constant demand level there is a linear relationship between price and velocity.
We can directly relate this to the overall scarcity of bitcoin. Given the overall ownership of bitcoin relates to a scarce good with a set limited supply, we now have two factors that we can say relate to the average price of bitcoin. Market supply will vary. Large holders who sell will cause increases in the amount of supply leading to a lower level of demand and hence a price drop. Changes that lead to people purchasing bitcoin inversely lead to an increase in the level of price compared to other currencies.
Taking all other things equal, we can now demonstrate that for each level of demand, the level of price to the market relates directly to the velocity. Consequently, every increase in the usability of bitcoin increases the overall value of the currency. As this is a direct linear relationship we can simply say that if we increased the ability to use bitcoin such that the velocity bitcoin spending increased by a factor of 100, the price would equally increase just on a use factor by 96.2 times. At the time of writing bitcoin is valued approximately 2,500 USD. An increase in the velocity of bitcoin making it simple to use and increasing the turnover of bitcoin within the community by a factor of 100 would increase the average price of each bitcoin to an estimated $240,000 USD.
 
Scarcity This is further compounded by the limits imposed within bitcoin. With an imposed limit, we will see less than 20 million bitcoin within our life span and never more than 21 million, the total volume of bitcoin available without being divided into fractions is minimal when compared to the overall population. The imposition of a fixed maximum quantity that is introduced over time creates a level of scarcity within bitcoin. As adoption increases, the level of demand for the given amount of supply increases and hence the value of bitcoin increases.
Money cannot be studied as an isolated problem. To increase velocity, we need to increase use. As we increase use, we also increase the amount of demand. In the case of a static supply such as bitcoin, this leads to a deflationary effect where the value of bitcoin compared to other currencies increases faster than the linear effect from scaling velocity alone.
True value of money is to make trade simpler. Trade is difficult at best and near impossible without money. In being able to use money, financial transactions increase the satisfaction level of each person involved in a trade as each person would be expected to be able to complete more transactions that fulfil their needs wants, and desires. Money helps increase specialisation and the increased division of labour.
It leads to mass production and mass consumption, and without quoting Adam Smith, we see that money helps others as we help ourselves.
One of the first factors involved with the selection of a good money is portability and transmissibility.
Bitcoin is both simple to transmit and easy to move. Primarily, it has no weight and it can be easily transmitted from location to location and even across borders. An aspect of transmissibility that is often overlooked is liquidity. The ability to easily and quickly sell any amount without impacting the rate of the exchange impact price4. The more that an individual can sell compared to his holdings, the more value a particular currency has. Liquidity in use aids in increasing velocity.
 Scaling Ignoring all the economic consequences, what we have in segregated witness is the illusion of scaling.
Segregated witness introduces a 2 MB block and segregated witness at the same time. Increasing the block size is a scaling solution. Segregated witness is not. Segregated witness with a standard weight provides us 1.2 and 1.6 times the transactional throughput based on a 1 MB partial block and a 4 MB full block.
The reality of this is we have 4 MB masquerading as one. In a SegWit 2x option this is doubled.
Contrary to what people are being told, the witness information, that is the digital signatures are important. These have probative value.
This comes down to this idea that code is law once again and that they can just simply bypass everything related to the law. It does not matter what users do, it matters what exchanges and businesses do. These entities can be forced to comply and they will be. In some places, such as Victoria in Australia it is a criminal offence to delete data that is associated with financial transactions. For general users, pruning this information is not an issue. It is an issue for merchants and other companies. Under the legislative provisions they will be required to maintain the full data.
Consequently, SegWit is a scaling solution that is not providing scale, that is, an additional transactional increase against costs. It is the blocks that increase and at the same time, not segregated witness that 
 provides any increase, as we are told. What we have is a typical magician's trick. It is a bait and switch.
You look at the introduced information as they have you look away. What we really have is a 150% increase at a 400% cost. The simplicity of this is just increasing the block size provides 260% more throughput without SegWit.
Putting it another way, segregated witness has 62.5% overhead. That is, it reduces throughput by two thirds.
In many ways, this is the biggest confidence trick to have ever occurred within bitcoin. It makes Mt Gox seem mild.
I say this again so that anyone can understand it.
Segregated witness increases the amount of data storage and network traffic by 400% to gain a transactional throughput of 150%. Simply introducing a 4 MB block or in SegWit 2x and 8 MB block will gain 400% and 800% of the throughput respectively.
 Sidechains There are several problems with the concept of a side-chain being implemented in order to scale bitcoin.
Firstly, more money leads to higher prices of goods. In regard to bitcoin, what this means is that the addition of additional sidechains lowers the price of bitcoin. It is in effect a form of inflation where the value of money is limited through the expansion of the money supply. People are not interested in money, they are interested in what they can buy with money. When someone holds bitcoin, it is not because they want bitcoin, it is because they want to be able to obtain something more valuable to them at a later point. Every individual has a subjective level of demand for the quantity of money they wish to save and hold. It is these differing subjective values held by each individual that lead to all market transactions.
Every individual utilises their holdings in money to bid in competition with others for the products they seek to obtain. Each side-chain operates in competition with all others. The argument is that a one-toone peg will enable settlement on the Blockchain without any loss of functionality. In this argument, the point being made is that a complete one-to-one peg can enable settlement without bitcoin whilst also maintaining financial integrity.
Historically, use of gold certificates started with the argument that gold was difficult to transport adding a layer of cost to transacting. Initially, gold certificates were mapped one-to-one with gold. Like all systems of this type this quickly degraded into a fractional reserve system. The ability to peg multiple payments within sidechains leads to many separate fractional reserve systems. The first possibility involves multiple pegs to a single transaction. This of course assumes the integrity of the side-chain which naturally is lower than bitcoin itself. Further, there is nothing stopping the introduction of a peg that is associated with a side-chain being mapped in a manner that is not analogous to 1 to 1 mapping.
Additionally, there are no set rules allowing for fixed mappings. Consequently, it is possible to map a side-chain at one rate and to subsequently alter this at a later time.
An additional problem is the introduction of sidechains with a restrictive cap on the number of transactions acts to limit the growth of bitcoin. The impact is that bitcoin becomes the ugly sister to side-chain based solutions. The limits restrict the growth of bitcoin to alternate side uses and when implemented through segregated witness, and destroy the capability to implement widespread adoption.
One of the key requirements that would be needed in the widespread adoption of any cryptocurrency is the integration on chain of pseudonymous records5 that can be analysed after the fact. Adding additional 
 layers designed to obfuscate information only introduces negative repercussions, making the system less able to be widely adopted.
Sidechains act as a multiplier against the forms of money. In effect, it produces multiple monies on the one system. Multiple monies complicate trade. Each individual form of money used within the market increases the level of complexity involved in comparing prices. As the Internet becomes more and more universally distributed, the integration of multiple prices will become more important. The use of many sidechains complicates this.
By the 19th century, global commerce had settled upon only two separate precious metals. These were gold and silver. They formed the basis underlying the valuation of international currencies. This still proved difficult with many countries on a gold standard trading with others on a silver standard (including India and China). The difficulty in placing orders for international trade was exaggerated as the market ratios between gold and silver fluctuated. This volatility added risk and led to unanticipated gains and loss for the individual merchants. Generally speaking, the average merchant is knowledgeable when it comes to their own business that does not like to engage in risk in areas where they are less informed.
In the past, specialised merchants known as arbitrageurs would be employed to minimise the risk that resulted due to foreign trade and the associated fluctuations in international pricing. These middlemen would assume the burden of risk for a price allowing merchants to specialise in their own area without the need to worry further about foreign exchange. The introduction of sidechains and the creation of many types of money would lead to a scenario where these trusted third parties are reintroduced into the system. In a system based upon a single sound money, these trusted middlemen are no longer needed. Their role is released allowing them to produce goods and services that people want more than the creation of multiple types of money.
Throughout history, economic development has resulted in the decrease in the number of monies leading to increased efficiencies. The move towards introducing more monetary channels is not providing consumers with increased choice, it is an attempt to force people away from a simple solution.
Bitcoin was designed to remove many of the trusted intermediaries, and certainly not as a methodology to create new middlemen.
 Bimetallism The use of both gold and silver for money in international trade resulted in problems. Merchants were required to maintain prices set in both gold and silver. This resulted in government manipulation. It provided the excuse for regulators to step in and set the price within the market. The consequence was a system where gold and silver could only be exchanged at set prices using the ratio officially published from the Treasury and generally procured at a bank. This is a system we would deem to be a price controlled market. As with all good intentions, the results were unintended consequences that came through additional discoveries of silver.
The changing use pattern between gold and silver in different areas of the world led to arbitrage opportunities. The fallacy in all of these schemes is price fluctuation. Any initial peg naturally fails to take into account market reactions. A pegged currency created within sidechains is not the same as the underlying asset. This creation of artificial scarcity deems bitcoin as an asset that is difficult to transfer, a claim that could not be further from the truth. Scaling through the use of sidechains adds no additional scalability over increasing the block size and using native bitcoin transactions. The additional overhead in both settling the side-chain transaction within bitcoin and the side-chain transactions themselves leads to an increased set of data and hence less scalability.
Comparing this with segregated witness and the proposed scalability solution, we start to see that the system offers far less than it promises. For the addition of more data, we have additional cost. It is not 
The illusion of scale in segregated witness 
important that this is put onto a side-chain, it is important that it is part of the transaction. The introduction of the bait and switch transaction hiding some of the data does not reduce the transactional cost, rather, increases the overhead while calling the cost by a new name. It does not matter what name is used, a bit is a bit and any data transferred across a network is indistinguishable from the common Internet router’s point of view.
Economics cannot be ignored. To do so invites disaster.
 Conclusion In this paper, we demonstrate that all changes come with associated costs. Stating that there is no need to account for data as it is weighted differently or is processed on a separate software function does not remove the economic costs associated with a system.
Further, deciding to discount information arbitrarily through centrally-controlled mandates fails to account for the true cost of the service. In deciding what the use case should be for each user, segregated witness is arbitrarily altering the market conditions associated with the use of bitcoin. In deciding that settlement is more important to them than the use of cash transactions for users, places the promoters of segregated witness in a position of arbitrary control.
The subjective nature of individual decisions leads to differing valuations. What one individual is willing to pay for a service will never match with another. This is the basis of trade; disparities in subjective valuation.
The limitation of segregated witness and its ability to introduce sidechains to bitcoin removes the key aspects of scarcity from the system. The change of bitcoin from a cash and payment system into a limited settlement system alters the fundamental nature of the environment and the economics of the system. Introducing sidechains leads to a scenario where bitcoin becomes the capital control system for a large fiat based environment. The proposed limitations associated with sidechains cannot be enforced.
There is no way to ensure the one-to-one pegging of each bitcoin. More importantly there is no reason for this to exist as a solution. If each individual unit can be used on chain, we come to the realisation that we have not actually achieved any cost savings.
This leads to the sole solution that can logically follow. That is an initial small amount of bitcoin will end up propping large quantities of values held within sidechains. This introduces fractional reserve banking into bitcoin and destroys the scarcity factor. Without scarcity, bitcoin may as well be PayPal or any bank or credit system. Once we start to realise that it is scarcity that makes bitcoin valuable, and that coupled with the ability to trade quickly, safely, and across borders, we start to understand that any addition to the protocol that removes scarcity, and lowers the velocity, will limit the value that can be traded market. As we demonstrated above, when the value of the money supply is diluted, the value of wealth remains constant leading to a lower price for money. Further, limiting the velocity of money directly limits its price.
The simple answer to the economics of the system is to maintain scarcity and increase the velocity through enhanced use. It is using bitcoin that makes it valuable. It is only through its potential to use bitcoin that it becomes a store of value. The argument that we should develop a store of value using bitcoin is placing the cart before the horse. A store of value exists when an item has increasing value and that comes through increasing use. Removing and deleting use cases limits the use.


Abstract One of the little-known aspects of bitcoin is the nature of the proof of work system. There are many people, especially those who support a UASF or PoW change that believe a distributed system should be completed as a mesh. In this, they confuse centralised systems with centrality. The truth of the matter, no matter which proof of work system is implemented, they all follow a maximal growth curve that reflects the nature of the firm is detailed in 1937 by Ronald Coase. In this paper, we address the issues of using alternate proof of work systems with regards to either incorporating alternate functions in an extension of simply securing the network against the use of proof of work systems in an attempt to create a one person one vote scenario in place of economic incentivisation.
 
Introduction One of the little-known aspects of bitcoin is the nature of the proof of work system. There are many people, especially those who support a UASF or PoW change that believe a distributed system should be completed as a mesh. In this, they confuse centralised systems with centrality. The truth of the matter, no matter which proof of work system is implemented, they all follow a maximal growth curve that reflects the nature of the firm as detailed in 1937 by Ronald Coase (1937).
The bitcoin White Paper was very specific. users of the system "vote with their CPU power" [1]. What this means, is that the system was never generated to give one vote per person. It is designed purely around economic incentives individuals with more hash power will have provided more investment into the system. These individuals who invest more in the system gain more say in the system. At the same time, no one or even two individuals can gain complete control of the system. We'll explore the nature of cartels in a separately, but these always fail without government intervention. The reason for cartels failing comes down to the simple incentivisation of the most efficient member. The strongest cartel member always ends up propping up the weakest. This leads to a strategy of defection.
No proof of work-based solution ever allows for a scenario where you have one vote to one person. The anti-sybiling functions of bitcoin and all other related systems based on proof of work or similar derivatives are derived from an investment based strategy. Solutions to the implementation of ASIC based systems are constantly proposed as a methodology of limiting the centralisation of proof of work systems as it is termed. The truth of the matter is that the mining function within any proof of work system naturally aligns to business interests. This leads to corporations running machines within data centres. On the way that democracies and republics have migrated away from small groups of people individually voting for an outcome towards a vote for a party, the transactional costs associated with individual choice naturally leads to corporate solutions. In this, the corporation mirrors a political party.
In this paper, we address the issues of using alternate approval work systems with regards to either incorporating alternate functions in an extension of simply securing the network against the use of proof of work systems to create a one person one vote scenario in place of economic incentivisation. We will demonstrate conclusively that all systems migrate to a state of economic efficiency. The consequence of this is that systems form into groups designed to maximise returns. The effect is that bitcoin is not only incentive compatible but is optimal. No system can efficiently collapse into an order of one vote one individual and remain secure. In the firm-based nature of bitcoin, we demonstrate that the inherent nature of the firm is reflected within mining pools. Multiple aggregation strategies exist. The strategies range from the creation of collective firms where members can easily join or leave (mining pools) through to more standard corporate structures.
 Social choice, Bitcoin, and Arrow’s theorem There are many alternative propositions to the bitcoin Blockchain. Some of these utilise alternative scenarios that have value or utility other than or in addition to the mere solution of problems that lead to the securing of the network. Some altcoins have proposed Seti-at-home style solutions for all types of problems including the search for cures to cancer.
Whenever we add additional states into any system, these need to be taken in consideration of the overall utility and welfare that results. The initial system changes dynamically to vary significantly even on small changes. - The most important part of this consequence is that any additional inclusion is either of no utility and thus should not be incorporated or is of utility that can be expressed across a market in the form of profit. An additional inclusion is either (A) would be of no utility and thus should not be incorporated, or is (B) of utility that can be expressed across a market in the form of profit. Small variations in the initial states can result in large changes. This creates a social choice problem.
 
Bitcoin was simplified to only involve the solution of securing the network to ensure that no alternatives could diminish the security of the system. This is, it forms a simple two-good, two-person Edgeworthbox economy form of a distribution problem. At each point, there is a known solution representing the way of distributing goods between members. Each of these states is mutually exclusive. Although each agent will express his or her own preferences for alternative uses, it remains simple to determine the overall maximal returns.
Without alternatives, the mining solution becomes Pareto efficient.
The alternative of adding so-called “useful” puzzles to bitcoin leaves a scenario where there is an additional utility in the solution itself. This additional created utility varies between the users of the network. That is, no two individuals will have the same preference for this use. This is even assuming a single use alternative and precluding the addition of multiple competing solutions. In these extended scenarios we come up against problems such as Condorcet’s paradox1.
In this paper, we will only touch on is lightly on this topic, but for the dedicated reader we direct them to “Advanced Microeconomic Theory” (Jehele & Reny, 2000).
 In chapter 6 of this book, the authors address Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem2 (Arrow, 1957).
The primary problem with the addition of alternate forms of utility is how to choose which one is included, how much and then who decides. In locking any alternative into the protocol, we start to incorporate possible debates over profitability and utility. The problem with this is that no two parties are going to see the same utility that results from the same expenditure.
The most important part of this consequence is that any additional inclusion is either of no utility and thus should not be incorporated or is of utility that can be expressed across a market in the form of profit. In the form of profit, the miner will benefit not only from the redistribution of bitcoin wealth in the allocation that comes from the discovery of a block solution, but also from the utility associated with the alternate use.
The result is that miners will still seek to maximise profit. This rational behaviour leads them to the optimal strategy seeking returns that are just over the risk-free rate as other miners enter the market.
When the utility is divided between securing the network and alternative uses, the result that must 
naturally flow is that the investment in securing the network in a mixed-use environment needs to be lower than that which will occur in a pure single use environment.
The overall consequences that bitcoin becomes less secure as the investment in mining infrastructure that would secure the network becomes divided between securing the network and other uses that have been tacked onto the network. This becomes an allocation problem with the efficient allocation of scarce goods no longer being optimised. In this instance, the primary good, the overall security of the system is mixed with alternatives that provide neither the optimisation of the primary security function or the alternative use. These alternative use scenarios are highly valued by the individuals proposing their incorporation into a proof of work solution, but they are less valued by most people using the system.
There are many “worthy causes” coupled with inherent scarcity. To the individual promoting each cause, the subjective value exceeds the cost of provision. However, the simple fact that these are not provided on market to the level desired by everyone demonstrates that they are not universally valued.
To many, this concept seems to promote injustice or behaviour that is not fair. The tragic nature of scarcity is that there are always trade-offs and all value is subjective.
What we see from Condorcet’s paradox is that the incorporation of multiple options reduces efficiency.
In attempting to solve several problems outside the value of money, we create a scenario where no ideal valuation has been subjectively returned. The value of a pure money is in its ability to measure alternative values. A single maximised currency removes the ability to hide subjective preferences. The existing monetary system with the incorporation of inflation, fractional reserve banking, and government manipulation leads to a scenario where individual’s value measurements cannot be individually obtained. Although each individual values each trade subjectively when compared to others, these are valued objectively based on the time and interceding factors that apply at that moment.
Simply put, the value of mining is not simply wasted, it is incorporated into the value that we gain in a new transactional medium. The value of mining is the security of the bitcoin network.
 The Nature of the Firm Ronald Coase (1937) demonstrated that transactional costs lead to firms optimising size. In his argument, he demonstrated that where all things are equal a firm will tend to be larger until a point of management inefficiency is reached. Where the cost of organisation increases at a lower rate than the increase in transactions organised, a firm will tend to grow. Additionally, in a system with more stability, entrepreneurial risk will be lowered. This leads to a scenario where the organisation is more aligned to market needs and less likely to make costly mistakes. In this scenario, an increase in the transactions organised results from the ability to plan more effectively.
As the increase in the supplier price factors of production lowers, firms will seek to maximise returns and grow to a point of maximal efficiency. This growth strategy has an overall limit. Once a threshold point has been exceeded, the gains associated with increases in organisation start to become balanced with the additional layers of management and control structures needed within the organisation. As hierarchical structures increase, the costs of providing services start to increase. The optimal size of any firm is maximised at the point where the greatest returns are achieved for each unit of cost.
 Firm strategies It is interesting when we start to note the reactions of many individuals to the formation of corporations.
In an article in CoinDesk3, they talk about the balance of power and how to return this to the “users”.
We have of course an extremely partisan view being aired. The reality is there are only a few strategies 
 that are successful within any proof of work system. The system was determined to be based on onevote per CPU (Satoshi, 2008) and not one vote per person or one vote per IP address.
The reasons for this is simple, there is no methodology available that can solve byzantine consensus on an individual basis. The solution developed within bitcoin solves this economically using investment.
The parties signal their intent to remain bound to the protocol through a significant investment. Those parties that follow the protocol are rewarded. The alternative strategy takes us back to the former and failed systems such as e-cash that could not adequately solve Sybil attacks and decentralise the network.
Bitcoin manages to maintain the decentralise nature of the network through a requirement that no individual party can ever achieve more than 50% of the network hash rate.
In all proof of work systems, there are requirements to inject a costly signal into the network that is designed as the security control. To many people, they believe that the cryptographic element, namely the hashing process is the security feature of bitcoin. This is a fallacy, it is the economic cost that is relevant to the overall system and not the individual element.
The benefits of a hash function are that they are difficult to solve in the nature of the proof of work algorithm but are easy to verify. This economic asymmetry is one of the key features of bitcoin. Once a user has found a solution, they know it can be quickly broadcast and verified by others. Additionally, the hash algorithm provides a fair distribution system based on the amount of invested hash rate. The distinction from proof of stake solution as has been proposed comes in the requirement to constantly reinvest. A proof of stake system requires a single investment. Once this investment is created, the system is incentivised towards the protection of the earlier investment. This leads to a scenario known as a strategic oligopoly game.
The solution using a proof of work algorithm is the introduction of an ongoing investment. This is different to an oligopoly game in that sunk cost cannot make up for continued investment. In a proof of stake system, prior investment is crystallised allowing continued control with little further investment.
Proof of work differs in that it requires continuous investment. More than this, it requires innovation.
As with all capitalist systems, they are subject to Schumpeterian dynamical change (Shumpeter, 1994).
The system of creative destruction allows for cycles of innovation. Each innovation leads to waves of creation over the destruction of the old order.
This process creates continued growth. Proof of work-based systems continue to grow and continue to update and change. Any incumbent corporation or other entity needs to continue to invest knowing that their continued dominance is not assured. In bitcoin, we have seen innovative leaps as people moved from CPU-based mining into GPU-based systems. This initial innovation altered the software structure associated with the mining process in bitcoin. That change significantly altered the playing field leading to novel techniques associated with FPGAs and later ASICs dedicated to a specific part of the mining process.
The error held by many people is that this move from a CPU-based solution into more costly implementations could have been averted. A consequence of this has been the introduction of alternative proof of work systems into many of the alt-coins4 . These systems have been implemented without the understanding that it is not the use of ASICs that is an issue. It is that the belief that individual users can individually mine in a mesh system will be able to be implemented as a successful proof of work.
In the unlikely event that a specialised algorithm was implemented that could only run once on any one machine CPU, it would still lead to the eventual creation of corporate data centres for mining. In the section above, we showed using Arrow’s theorem how only a single use proof of work system can be effective. If we extend this and look at the Theory of the Firm (Coase, 1937) we note that in a system 
 of prices, reduction could be carried out without any organisation. One issue against this arises from the cost of information. Interestingly, as we move into a world of increasingly more information, it becomes scarce information that is important. As the amount of information becomes more voluminous, the ability to uncover accurate and timely information becomes scarcer.
The ability to specialise in the coordination of the various factors of production and the distribution of information leads towards vertical integration within firms. We see this first voiced in Adam Smith’s (Smith, 1776) postulation on the firm: “It began to be seen that there was something more important than the relations inside each factory or unit contained by an undertaker; there were the relations of the undertaker with the rest of the economic world outside his immediate sphere … The undertaker busies itself with the division of labour inside each firm and he plans and organises consciously” The end of this specialisation as Coase (1937) demonstrated using Smith (1776) is that the capitalist: “it is related to the much larger economic specialisation, of which he himself is merely one specialised unit. Here, he plays his part as a single cell in a larger organism, mainly unconscious of the wider role he fills.” Everyone can choose to either seek further information or act on the information that they already have.
This information can be in the form of market knowledge, product knowledge, or expertise, but at some point, the individual needs to decide to act. There is a cost to obtaining information. The returns on obtaining more information hit a maximum level and start to decrease at a certain point. The entrepreneur acts as a guiding influence managing the risk associated with incomplete information compared to the risk of not acting but rather waiting to obtain more information.
In the instance of bitcoin mining, the firm can increase in size through the integration of multiple specialist roles. Even given the assumption that any one process can run on but a single CPU, we come to the scenario of high-end datacentre servers. The Intel Xeon Phi 7290f5 implements 72 Atom CPU Cores. Each core runs two threads. Even taking the control system into account, this leaves 142 processes able to run per system. With four cards per RU6 this allows for datacentre implementations of 5,964 mining processes to run on a pure CPU-based proof of work implementation.
One person can manage a small number of mining server implementations within a home or small business environment. In large data centre-based organisations such as Facebook, a single administrator can run 20,000 servers7. The effect of this would be one individual managing 2,840,000 individual CPU-based mining processes. This alone is outside the scaling capabilities of any individual. This can be further enhanced as cost savings through the creation of large data centres, management savings and integrating multiple network and systems administrators is considered. As we start to add additional layers we come to a maximum where it is no longer profitable to grow the firm in size. Right up until that point, the firm will grow.
The result is a longtail distribution8 of firms. The most efficient and highly capitalised firms will grow to the point where they are no longer profitable. At each point in time, each organisation competes to maintain its market share and returns. If it seeks to grow its operations, it does this in competition with all the firms. Each block reward is a zero-sum game. To gain a larger percentage and return, the individual organisation needs to increase the amount of hash power supplied. Other strategies such as 
 Selfish Mining9 failed to understand this point. Any scheme that reduces the overall take reduces the revenue of the individual miner at the same time. Such a strategy leads to an overall loss.
At any point in time, in a proof of work-based system we also need to consider the looming threat of innovation. Any mining hardware would be expected to become obsolete within a short amount of time.
Add to these increased efficiencies in energy use and cooling technology and we start to see that even foreseeable disruption can change the nature of the market. Each individual organisation can plan for the known risk factors but can never plan for unknown contingencies. The result is that organisations cycle as new innovators replace the incumbents.
For all proof of work systems, economic efficiencies naturally lead towards larger competing firms.
There is no known system that allows for the fair distribution of resources in a distributed manner that does not lead to competing corporations managing the primary system.
 Strategic Oligopoly Game In modelling the outcomes of business strategies in models of incomplete information about the others intention, we can use game theory, and a subdiscipline on games of strategy. We can extend our analysis of proof of work when we model the decisions of firms on the pricing and levels of production coupled with decisions on how much to invest in research and development. As noted above, research projects are costly and represent a risk to business. Any firm that invests also should model the risk that a competitive firm may copy or otherwise follow the primary firms result. This risk needs to be balanced against that of losing competitive advantage. Such a loss can lead to a long-term decline in market share and profitability.
This leads as to oligopoly strategies. These would include price-fixing and market manipulation strategies. In a proof of work system, oligopoly strategies, or the formation of cartels fail due to the impact of the most profitable firm seeking to defect. In all cartels, the least profitable firm needs to be propped up by the other members. The scenario always leads to dissent and the eventual failure of the oligopoly.
Oligopoly grows when the individual parties in the system can set the rules in such a way that they can restrict entry to new players. In the case of a proof of Stake-based system, the ability to withhold funds for large entities leads to a high barrier to entry. In a situation such as that which has evolved in Ethereum, a single large player in a proof of stake system can set the rules. The aim of any oligopoly is to maximise profits. In general, oligopoly form businesses set barriers to entry using government licenses, economies of scale, patents, access to expensive and complex and highly capitalised systems and technology and predatory behaviours. Government regulation is also one of the major factors influencing this form of system.
Proof of stake allows players to form protective cartels. In competitive environments cartels breakdown naturally. Proof of stake can be created in a non-competitive manner. Even if the system starts off competitively, it is the nature of an oligopoly to seek abnormal profits and this can be achieved through the manipulation of the rules over time. Such manipulation can result in increasing levels of control as the incumbent firms ensure that innovation does not change or disrupt the status quo.
The system degrades into oligarchy. This is a power structure with rule by a small number of people. It is what the Greeks in the time of Aristotle called a tyranny. A more common name today would be a plutocracy. The proof of stake system is a form of oligarchy that represents societal control by a small number of wealthy individuals.
 
The introduction of control by wealth holdings (also known as proof of stake) leads to the creation of a Stackelberg leadership model (Stackelberg, 2011). The players of the game include the leader, the individual with the largest proof of stakeholding, and the followers. This is a game of competition based on quantity. In this, the Stackelberg leader is commonly referred to as the market leader. This former competition occurs when one member has an advantage that then allows it to move first. The requirement is commitment power. The equivalent is an incumbent monopoly and this is obtained through the holding of excess capacity. Proof of stake derives from this form of commitment scheme.
The introduction of a proof of stake form of commitment allows the dominant firm to make a move that directly contradicts Cournot’s premise that each duopolist will produce the equivalent measures.
The biggest flaw with a proof of stake based system is the inability to account for present action. Past holdings lead to an ongoing scenario where the wealthy can hold their power without the need to innovate or continue to invest in the market. In a proof of work-based system, individuals need to reinvest consistently and constantly, research and develop, and evolve. It is this reason that these two systems are so different. As with many aspects of bitcoin and other crypto currencies, the defining factors are economic and not the implementation of cryptographic tools.
 Mining pools The first firm strategy to be discussed is that of Pool mining. Several pool mining strategies exist. In all mining pools, pool acts as a controlling function allowing each of the individual pool members to share in a block reward. There are various strategies involved with pool mining ranging from users providing their own hardware and solving on their own systems with an aim to receiving rewards and a more regular basis.
Joining a pool does change a miner’s expected revenue, it provides a lowering of transaction costs to the business as any variation in revenue presents as a cost and a risk to the full miner. Another aspect of profitability is the time value to money. A small miner with infrequent returns requires capital to be tied up in larger quantities than would be needed in instances of variation being low. Uncertainty leads to higher levels of liquid assets to cover possible slow months.
Most pools are formed in groups of businesses. It is not true to say that miners in a pool behave as a single agent with a centralised coordinator. Some of the pools allow minors to vote individually, that is, they separate their voting on block policy based on the miner’s individual hash power. The reason for this is rational, all operators who do not allow for members to make a choice quickly find that they are going to lose members. As noted above, members of a mining pool can move between pools relatively easily and only into long-term contracts when it is beneficial.
All rational organisations act strategically. This is not a function of bitcoin, it is the nature of the firm.
The theory of the firm was hypothesised by Ronald Coase (1937). Just as Coase argued, “economic theory has suffered in the past from a failure to clearly state its assumptions”, so has research into bitcoin suffered. The selfish mining paper is one of many that failed to analyse nature of the bitcoin network. As with all firms, the size of the organisation is a function of transactional costs. In mining pools, pool-based firms can consolidate the hash power associated with many individuals and small organisations. Each of the small organisations experience a combination of larger costs and higher risk when operating alone.
Risk is a form of transactional cost. There is a cost element associated with capital. When capital is scarcer it goes up in value. When an asset is less liquid it degrades in value. For the small organisation, bitcoin is a high-risk endeavour. Risk is partly associated with the inability to predict payment. Although an average, an individual will receive a return associated with their investment in hash rate, the inability to predict the frequency of such a return for a small party means that the cost of time needs to be considered into any profitability calculation.
 For instance, a small organisation that would expect to win one block every week may gain one block in a week and then gain nothing for several months when they suddenly receive several block rewards in a row. During the period when they are not receiving any rewards the small operator would still need to pay for expenses including power and any property leases as well as staff costs and other incidentals.
Most small organisations do not have capital available and may be leveraged. Any period where the organisation is not receiving a regular income results in additional charges from interest and even the loss of payment discounts to suppliers.
These are some of the many reasons why small organisations band together to form organisations and larger groups. Reducing the risk of operation reduces overall transactional charges within the firm.
Rewards are distributed at infrequent, random intervals, miners form mining pools in part to decrease the variance of their income rate. In part as the transactional costs associated with running a firm are varied. It is not only the variance as we discussed above that other costs within the organisation. As Coase (1937) addressed, many aspects of an organisation are duplicated. A mining pool needs to secure their network. For a mining pool, operational costs can be distributed between pool members at a rate that is lower than any pool member can obtain themselves. These transactional costs increase the profitability of each member. Some of the reasons pools form include: 
Rather than many small providers duplicating services wastefully, pool mining consolidates the provision of these services to many parties.
The fees associated with the mining pool are competitive and need to be offered at a rate lower than the participants can provide on their own through solo mining.
Increased efficiency offers overall benefits to all participants.
 The important thing to note in any pool mining system is that members of the pool are only loosely bound. There are pool mining services that offer binding contracts and as the mining pool is better able to manage their own revenue, the loss of freedom and being locked into a contract term generally comes at a lower cost to the consumer of the mining services. These long-term contracts offer pool members slightly higher profitability at the expense of lower freedom to choose and move pools. Members of the mining pool are either bound for a contractual term or can join it will and can move their combined hash power between organisations. To assert the mining pool controls the network is to misunderstand the nature of the firm. In this, the firm members, those people associated with the mining pool can choose to defect and leave the pool and join another.
Enjoining another pool, they are seeking either that the profitability offered by the pool or they are voting with their hash power for a proposal offered by that pool. It is a common miscomprehension that mining pools are centralised and do not reflect the will of the members.
The ease at which mining pool members can vote with their feet and change pools belies this. Mining pools are simply collections of individuals who can express their own opinions and choices by aligning with an organisation which supports similar goals. Hence mining pools mirror the creation of political parties in democratic political systems.
This again reflects the transactional costs of the firm.
The users political voice is amplified when they align with large groups. In society, we see this with the creation of worker’s unions, political parties, industry associations, lobby groups and more.
The fallacy held by many in the bitcoin community is that bitcoin is somehow different or above society.
It acts within it and as a conduit for financial transactions. It does not replace the nature of society nor the interactions of humans. We are a collection of self-interested individuals who act in a manner that some altruistically in extended kin groups. The reality of even these scenarios is that we act in our own self-interest but that the interests of the group we align with aid our own interests more. This mirrors 
 the transactional cost with a firm. Individuals act to minimise their own cost as well and sometimes this means forming groups.
 Mining corporations Corporations require less explanation than a distributed pool. As we noted above, the ability to consolidate can lower costs creating a more profitable solution. In any organisation, specialisation forms the key aspect of coming together to create a business. At the simplest example, we can take to individuals and investigate whether a strategic alliance would result in larger payouts for both.
First, we have Alice. Alice is an extremely proficient coder and can manage and control many systems.
Her software allows her to create a platform that returns an average of £500 per hour for every hour she works.
Next, we have Bob. Bob can follow instructions and setup mining equipment and hardware, but he is very inefficient and the processes associated with managing this business leave him unable to patch servers in an efficient manner. Bob can create a return of £120 per hour for his equal investment to Alice’s.
Although Alice’s extremely technically proficient, she is also an excellent accountant. Alice can manage the systems, the purchasing and all the required statutory returns. Both Bob and Alice work 50 hours per week. Alice can work 10 hours a week completing all the supporting work leaving her 40 hours that directly adds to productive mining and the returns she gets overall. Bob can do the same.
The result is that Alice can earn £20,000 each week when working on her own. Bob can work to earn £4,800 per week. Together, the two individually work returning £24,800. If Bob and Alice form a partnership, Alice can now work 50 hours each week specialising on the mining farm. This returns £25,000. Bob now spends 20 hours doing the joint accounts. We are ignoring any savings this example that would accrue through the merger. Bob can also provide 30 hours’ worth of work helping on the mining for a return of £3,600. In this example, we have the same cost base, but increased revenue for increased profitability.
Working in partnership, Alice, and Bob jointly and £28,600. In forming a business, Bob and Alice have increased their joint revenue by £3,800 for zero additional cost. Even though Alice is better than Bob and all activities, it is in her interest to form a partnership that increases their returns. If Alice can hire other developers that are more skilled than Bob allowing him to concentrate on the accounting, Bob can now specialise allowing the firm to grow even further.
We see in this simple example how bitcoin-based companies evolve. Many individuals operate rationally to produce the best outcome. This is the nature of the firm and therefore any proof of work system will always evolve into a corporate strategy. Even the me look at pool-based mining, the result is a collection of aggregation firms that collect results from pool miners and over time increasingly specialised pool members.
 Merchant-based solutions Merchants also coordinate and grow in scale to maximise returns. Eventually, we would expect to see groups of merchants making payments preferentially to different miners based on the level of service they expect. This does not require them to maintain full copy of the Blockchain. It is not receiving your transaction that is important, it is the ability to check that the majority of the hash power have accepted your transaction and included it into a block. It does not matter how many wallet nodes have received a transaction, it only matters that the majority hash power has received it. If there are 10,000 wallet nodes and 1,000 miners (nodes in the true definition) and the majority of the miners reject the transaction, it does not matter at all if every single wallet says that the transaction is valid. If a transaction does not get into a block, it is not a transaction in bitcoin.
 
The consequence is that merchants will end up working with miners to ensure the successful integration of their transactions. It is not users who care for the accuracy of protocol, it is merchants. When an individual walks into a store and makes a purchase, it is the merchant who was taking risk. It is the merchant who can be double spent not the person making the payment.
 Bitcoin and centralisation The bitcoin protocol is designed such that honesty is not required. The attacks against the existing protocol are limited in nature. A dishonest mining pool is unable to steal funds and would degrade their own profitability in seeking to attack the network. The system remains sound where 50% of the parties involved in the creation of blocks or less remain as separate parties.
 I didn't really make that statement as strong as I could have. The requirement is that the good guys collectively have more CPU power than any single attacker.
There would be many smaller zombie farms that are not big enough to overpower the network, and they could still make money by generating bitcoins. The smaller farms are then the "honest nodes". (I need a better term than "honest”) The more smaller farms resort to generating bitcoins, the higher the bar gets to overpower the network, making larger farms also too small to overpower it so that they may as well generate bitcoins too. According to the "long tail" theory, the small, medium and merely large farms put together should add up to a lot more than the biggest zombie farm.
Even if a bad guy does overpower the network, it's not like he's instantly rich. All he can accomplish is to take back money he himself spent, like bouncing a check. To exploit it, he would have to buy something from a merchant, wait till it ships, then overpower the network and try to take his money back. I don't think he could make as much money trying to pull a carding scheme like that as he could by generating bitcoins. With a zombie farm that big, he could generate more bitcoins than everyone else combined.10 Bitcoin is formed as a NSW Random graph with a distance of approximately d=1.32. At its heart, the centre of the bitcoin mining network is nearly a complete graph. In the paper, “On red balloons and bitcoin”11 the researchers note that Sybil resistance cannot be achieved at a distance greater than d>4.
The proposed changes to the system trying to be introduced in segregated witness and the UASF are based on a concept of transactions and blocks hopping across the mesh. This is inapplicable as it would be a power law network different to bitcoin. In the default bitcoin in limitation, it does not matter if 10,000 wallets decide they want to block transactions or blocks within bitcoin. The mining network forms what is termed a giant node. There is no such thing as a full validating node. At best, each of these nodes stops broadcasting. As it prunes itself from the network, the rest of the network acts to broadcast more efficiently.
All that matters in bitcoin is mining. As more fully validating Sybils are added to the network, the more you get attackers to waste their money. The changes to the network, as are proposed as a part of segregated witness change this leading to an incentivising of attacks. This problem with a defence by wallets comes because of a lack of understanding of network graph theory.
The introduction of a wallet defence changes the structure of the giant node within bitcoin from a Newman Strogatz Watts (NSW) random graph into a power law system. In computer science, this is more generally known as a mesh network. That sounds great and looks really distributed when you 
 draw a picture, the issue is that the lower we have our distance the less likely we are to have an attack.
The introduction of the sibyls which is what in effect we are doing with wallets creates the scenario that bitcoin was trying to stop The argument is that verification nodes will stop propagation. The reality is they self-prune. As they do not send alerts stating that the connecting node has violated any conditions, all that occurs is that they are bypassed.
 The assumption of a mesh network moves away from the completely connected ring network that is formed in the majority of hash power within bitcoin into an easily compromised mesh. This is what you have when you alter Bitcoin. Making a UASF chain would enable this. Bitcoin only works with miners controlling it.
 Segregated witness The reason for the introduction of segregated witness is an attempt to return power away from the miners and to give this back to the developers. The argument is that users are the ones who benefit. The reality is that users have no say unless they mine. This does not change with segregated witness. The best that is achieved is the introduction of security flaws.
 Conclusion We can see that in all possible instances, any proof of work system, it is incentivised towards corporate consolidation. The frequently promoted idea of many individuals voting through individualised wallets within bitcoin does not stand scrutiny. Proof of work systems derived from continuous and updated investment. It is not past investment or current holdings that matter, it is the amount that a party is willing to spend at the time the vote is occurring. In this way, we see that the introduction of a low-cost voting mechanism such as that proposed in a UASF acts to lower the overall security of the network and allows for the introduction of Sybil attacks. In a proof of work system, it is the party's willingness to continue investing that provides their ability to vote for the system. To mine blocks, it is not just the prior investment, but rather, the overall investment at a point in time. When a proposal for change 
occurs, it is a requirement of the system that energy is expended in the solution of a block that both secures a network and allows the individual miner to choose.
The rational decision for any mining firm is to choose the most profitable strategy. The impact of transactional costs naturally leads to the growth of consolidated entities. Any time where there is a differential of any type between two individuals, it starts to become profitable for everyone to specialise.
Even in the event where one individual is more skilled with regards to all areas than any other party, they will still find that they have differentials between their own skill sets. The marginal differences between their own skills always lead to a scenario where it is more profitable for that individual to concentrate on their specialties allowing others to increase the overall profitability of the firm. In the worst-case scenario, even where the introduction of additional people and the merger of mining entities leads to no more hash rate being obtained, it does lead to the reduction of time. The same amount of money earnt in a lower amount of time is an increased level of profit. Both parties can choose to either work on other tasks, engage in more leisure, or find other profit producing activities.
Consequently, all proof of work systems always consolidates into corporate entities. This is the nature of the system. It was not and cannot be designed for individualised control.


In this paper, we investigate the challenges associated with the competing approaches of utility theory and behavioural economics. It has been become commonplace to argue that humans act irrationally. This fallacious argument provides the foundation for paternalism. The fallacy of course is the error in determining objective value and absolute measures of rationality. Everyone is subjective in their utility valuations and consumer behaviour varies over time and place even for individuals. There is no challenge to regulatory design. The problem is not the addition of regulations designed to objectively maximise selected outcomes but rather the introduction of subjective decisions imposed from above paternalistically.
 Introduction Many criticisms of economics stems from a rudimentary analysis of the basics. If example we take equilibrium theory (Arrow & Hahn, 1971; Black, 1995; Samuelson, 1941), we see heavy criticism due to the inherent lack of equilibriums in society (Schumpeter, 1994, 1954). The key to understand this is that before we can understand disequilibrium we need to understand the ideal state. Just as the water in the Atlantic moves to an average level in equilibrium (von Stackelberg, 2011), it is the disequilibrium of the waves, tides and currents that makes it interesting and provides us with a real system. It is these currents, tides and other fluctuations that create a global environment that can sustain us. We can model the system equilibrium in the ideal and state that economics fails when it does not meet this condition (Geanakoplos, 2008), however, the truth is no system is in equilibrium for more than an instant and it is these moments of dynamic change that are of greatest interest.
In this paper, we investigate the challenges associated with the competing approaches of utility theory and behavioural economics. It has been become commonplace to argue that humans act irrationally (Sahlin & Brännmark, 2011). This fallacious argument provides the foundation for paternalism. The fallacy of course is the error in determining objective value and absolute measures of rationality.
Everyone is subjective in their utility valuations and consumer behaviour varies over time and place even for individuals (Mises, 2010, p 96).
There is no challenge to regulatory design. The problem is not the addition of regulations designed to objectively maximise selected outcomes but rather the introduction of subjective decisions imposed from above paternalistically.
 Rational choice theory Utility or rational choice theory is based on the hypothesis that individuals make prudent and logical decisions (Arrow, 1987, pp 25-39). These are decisions that bring the individual the greatest benefit or satisfaction given a selection of choices that are available at the time. This is a theory that has come under constant attack. It is easy to forget that all value is subjective. Economics is not based on the objective value of trade, rather it derives from the individualised selection of choices. What seems rational or irrational to one individual at one period maybe perfectly logical for another.
The attacks against this theory come from a subject of misunderstanding of time preferences and value.
A lot of misunderstanding has come from the imposed condition of rationality based on objective standards. To make rational value judgements, it is necessary to be in the proverbial shoes of another, living at the time and place that the decision was made and knowing the subjective value judgements of the individual. Everyone has different time preferences, risk tolerances and objectives. To judge these as arbitrarily irrational precludes the differences that come at the margins.
It was a common fallacy to value the absolute. In this misapplied theory, arguments over the value of water versus diamonds were common. Since Ricardo, we have understood that value at the margin determines the trade value of a good at a point in time and place (Böhm-Bawerk, 1891). For the thirsty traveller in the Sahara Desert the marginal value of a flask of water can exceed the value of diamonds.
Yet, that same individual in that same desert would be unlikely to accept an exchange as large as a swimming pool full of water (Rothbard, 2009). The value is on the margin.
This miscomprehension of subjective value has led economic pundits to create theories of bubbles and animal behaviour (Keynes, 1936). Without much in-depth analysis, we see the Tulip collapse1 of Holland (Calvo, 1987) as a bubble and this becomes commonly applied in the hypothesis of a rational behaviour, yet an analysis that does not take the environment into account. The world of the 17th century 
in Holland was one of upheaval and change. The gamble of life-and-death is not something we can expect to understand in modern Western society (Ariès, 1974). In an age of plague and starvation through crop failures in extended winters2, the question to ask would be whether it was more rational gamble one’s future and what we now call a bubble or to risk certain death for yourself and your family.
Like now, wealth creates opportunities.
The question of rationality is not a matter of a decision and one direction at one time, it is bounded on the environment we create that choice within. Simon (1967), proposed the theory of bounded rationality3. In this, people are limited in the information that they would need to make a complete decision. Thaler (2005) took this further with the idea of mental accounting, arguing that irrationality stems from differences in purchase choices. In each instance, they have of course failed to understand that the subjective value of good at one time and in one place is different from the same good at another time and place. The psychic energy that an individual obtains in the occasional longshot of a win can well exceed the perceived monetary benefit of saving the money and having a sure thing. For each of us, the subjective choices we make come from a combination of our environment, the situation we find ourselves in and the marginal differences at a point in time. Rational behaviour is not objective (Gordon, 2000), it is subjective and this is the main error in behavioural studies.
 Rational expectations Rational choice theory has been extended to incorporate information people hold that is derived from their past and expectations of this future experiences. It is possible to see this reflected in the example above. People living within the 17th century in Europe acted in a manner that was rational given their expectations. We commonly judge people based on our own expectations. For instance, when people compare the ability of Europe to improve following the Marshall plan4 with the injection of aid into Third World countries such as Uganda, it is usual to neglect the impact of human capital.
In Europe following World War II the destruction of capital goods and property did little to destroy the overall level of human capital even when the overall loss of life is considered (Sowell, 1995). When this is compared to the injection of aid into Third World countries, the error can be directly attributable to the difference in human capital available. Whereas the situation in Europe was the immediate destruction of capital equipment that would have been replaced over time, that in Third World countries is the introduction of new capital without the prerequisite knowledge and institutions. In each instance, the injection of funds can be similar and yet the outcome can be radically different. In one, knowledge of engineering, science and mathematics is coupled with existing institutions and legal process. On the other, the injection of capital is provided in an environment without institutional legal controls that can adequately stop corruption and a difference in knowledge (Sowell, 1996, 1998).
The same scenario was seen throughout history. Just as the Scots in the 18th-century became divided through differences in their high land and low land environments into those who embraced and those who rejected the “New scientific learning” (Sowell, 1995), so today we see cultural differences, biases and different levels of human capital leading to radically different outcomes. It is not irrationality, but the subjective nature of our choices that leads us into different outcomes.
 Behavioural economics Simms (2009) provided examples of what he deemed to be irrational behaviour. His research demonstrated that when people are anxious they make what he terms irrational decisions. This was extended to show that anxiety creating stressors act on the given brain to change the way that neurons 
 react in what is termed rational decision-making. Another way to look at this is to consider that stress is an influencing factor. Laboratory experiments demonstrating differences in behaviour fail to take the efficacy of these stresses into account. It is simple to state that human should react based on an unemotional response however, it is the heuristics and mental shortcuts that allow us to react in a manner that is considered humanly rational (Rothbard, 1962).
The concept of “rational emotions” has been proposed by Ariely (Ariely & Berns, 2010). Rather than the deviations of subjective rationality posited by researchers such as Dan Ariely (Ariely & Berns, 2010) and Daniel Kahneman (Kahneman & Tversky, 1996). In many ways, the concept of universal rationalism seems to be a manner of imposing subjective values. Not all individuals seek to maximise the same outcomes. And in a world of radical differences in many choices there is no one individual optimisation that can be available. Jehele & Reny (2000) present “Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem” (Arrow, 1957) demonstrating how extended scenarios lead to problems such as Condorcet’s paradox5.
The laboratory experimentation into behavioural studies and games simplifies these choices in an unrealistic manner. The reported sub-game will rarely if ever reflect the super game and yet this is what is modelled. A common game, the prisoner’s dilemma can be demonstrated in university experiments in isolation. When applied in real scenarios the model breaks down. The super game fails to account for subsequent events. It is deemed that the individual in prison can no longer have any effect. The reality and criminal studies demonstrates different outcomes (Miles & Ludwig, 2007). The sub optimal theoretic outcome does not apply due to additional external factors. For instance, do the parties in the game have contacts within prison that can punish the defector. Do others exist who could punish defection including through punishment of one’s family.
The primary problem with the addition of alternate forms of utility is how to choose which one is included, how much and then who decides. We see from social choice theory (Arrow, 1957) the problem resulting from no two parties deriving the same utility that results from the same expenditure. The most important part of this consequence is that any additional inclusion is either of no utility and thus should not be incorporated or is of utility that can be expressed across a market in the form of profit or increased utility. The utility associated with the alternate use many not seem rational to external parties, but this does not mean it is not to that person, even if they have regrets latter when things do not go as well as they would prefer.
The result is that people will still seek to maximise the utility, but that we express different time and risk preferences. This rational behaviour leads each of us to the optimal strategy seeking returns that are just over the risk-free rate as other parties enter the market. When the utility is divided between alternative uses, the result that must naturally flow is that the choices made by some people will naturally seem irrational to others.
 The cost of information We have seen that there are multiple aspects to the nature of economic decisions. Condorcet’s paradox (1989) allows as to understand that outside of the laboratory environment, conflicting choices lead to trade-offs and though these may seem suboptimal to one party, they can be rational when the time preferences and risk preferences of an individual are considered. Equally importantly, it is important to incorporate the cost of gaining information. Information is effectively infinite in nature. This leads to a scenario where the cost of gaining further information can exceed the value of the information being obtained. Optimal is not perfect.
 
When considering any economic cost, it is important to also consider the trade-offs. There are no distinctions between corporate investments or personal decisions in this matter. The incorporation of information into economic decision-making becomes part of any rational decision. Rationality is not perfection, rather, it involves optimisation. In making such a decision, the trade-offs between choices become critical. In many experiments related to behavioural economics, the measured decisions suffer from a subjectivity bias. The experimenters determine what they consider to be the rational choice.
People can state that they wish to lose weight and yet still eat excessively and this does not mean they are acting irrationally if they value the short-term utility greater than the long-term results (Smith, 1776).
Similarly, when the cost of obtaining information is considered, different individuals will have different cost payoff structures. The result is that information gathering may be suboptimal when viewed by one individual subjectively and yet remain optimal for another when alternative strategies are valued to a higher level of overall utility. When one group subjectively determines the value of an outcome, this does not make the rejection of that outcome suboptimal for the other group. Rationality comes from maximising one’s own utility against their own preferences (Gordon, 2000). In all instances, rationality fails to appear rational to any but the individual to whom the subjective choices made or applied.
It is always possible that an individual could gain more. In a different role or a different job many individuals could and more than they do in their preferred occupation. Most economists working within academic environments would be able to increment their income and earn higher levels of profitability in financial organisations or within market environments. The argument on rationality precludes emotional choices and decisions. The subjective value of a good is the value at the margin (Menger, 2009, Rothbard1962). This is not only the margin of the trade but the margin derived from the time and circumstances surrounding the exchange. It needs to incorporate the cost of information on the time preferences of the individual. Stating that individuals are irrational due to discrepancies in their risk preferences for instance is simply applying the preferential judgements of one subjective choice and valuing these more than the individual making the choice. The psychic utility obtained in risk avoidance by some and risk seeking by others is not irrational, it demonstrates the subjectivity of economic choice and values.
 Welcome to Core, SegWit and SegWit2x This is the eternal dichotomy we see from paternal statists and socialists everywhere. They believe they know best. The argument always comes down to decentralised control. They state how they need to protect us from companies that will centralise and dominate and control us. How do they manage this?
That answer is simple, they, those who know more than the rest of us combined, in this instance the developers within Core, BlockStream and the DGC pull the wool over our eyes teaching us a lesson in decentralised centralisation. They remove the companies except for theirs.
Companies do not act as a whole. Rather, corporations in competition are a means of distributing the votes of many people. Each shareholder incorporation acts independently in buying or selling the shares of that organisation. Any individual can do this with a public company. Even private companies, competition between companies means that state-controlled organisations are the only ones that can gain a monopoly. The reality of the argument being posited is that corporate control is somehow centralised. The reality is that a small group of developers and companies are hijacking a project with the aim of centralising it, dominating it and incorporating the means to control this project through the creation of the one thing that can destroy it. It is scarcity that makes bitcoin strong.
It is use value as a payment source that makes bitcoin valuable. These are the things that are being destroyed. The network in bitcoin is not centralised. In capitalist societies companies come and companies go. Each and every block solved within the bitcoin Blockchain is a new challenge. Each is a new investment in each is a new opportunity for disruption. That is what cannot be centralised.
 
The lie is that they (Core and their cronies) fear corporations. They do not want professionalism. They do not want something that scales to help the masses. They want control and they want paternalism.
Like all socialists and anarchists, they fear capitalism for it is a meritocracy. You do not rise to the top because you have the right connections but rather because you can offer something that the masses want. Capitalism is vulgar but that is because it serves the common man.
The fear is not of centralisation but rather the loss of their paternalistic control.
 Conclusion All too often, we see the argument that behavioural economics demonstrates the irrationality of humans in economic decision-making. Individuals make choices based on their individual values and utility.
However, all utility is obtained at the margin. The concept of rational choice theory has been hijacked through the inclusion of objective constraints that differ from the individual subjective values. The maximisation of one’s psychic utility is an emotional decision that is rational only when the time preferences, risk preferences and life experience of the individual are considered. These preferences change not only in time but through continued experience. To complicate matters, they may differ throughout the day (Mises, 2010). The preferences expressed by an individual in the morning will not reflect those presented following events that have been emotionally uplifting or emotionally draining.
This does not as a behavioural economist may argue make these decisions irrational. Rational behaviour within the amenity is an emotional response with the consequence that any obtained utility is not going to be objectively measured in monetary value but rather an overall economic utility that can only be subjectively measured by the individual. What is rational for one person at one time may not be rational for the same individual at a slightly different place and time let alone anyone else. All choices exist on the margins and it is there that we may find areas of interest to explore.
This fear of capitalism is what is played by those who seek to maintain and ongoing paternalistic control.
They use the fear of centralised power to subvert an open process moving away from a truly free system into one where we are told what to do. When we allow them to tell us that we are irrational, we allow them to decide our fate. Rational choice and rational expectations are not the irrational option they are made to be. The greatest win of those who hate capitalism is the behavioural school of economic thought. Like that of Keynes before them, it opens the means to allow other to tell us that we don’t really know what we desire, what we want, or what we need. It is not companies we need to fear, what we need to fear most of those who tell us paternalistically that they can choose best.
